---
title: "Getting user input"
teaching: 5
exercises: 0
questions:
- "How can I get write a program that asks for user input and does stuff with the input?"
objectives:
- "Use the input statement to elicit user input. "
- "Understand that the input statement returns a string and casting is necessary when the input is to be treated as a different data type."

keypoints:
- the input command returns a string. 
---
## Recall the print command

So far you’ve learned how to print a message on the console window using the `print` statement. We use this command to tell the interpreter to to output the value entered as a parameter on the console(screen).   

## Introducing input
Now suppose that we would like the user to enter a value while the program is running and for us store the value in a variable. This is achieved using the input function. The input function is defined as follows:   

~~~
input([prompt])
~~~
{: .python}

`input` pauses the operation of a program in order for the user to enter some text in the console. It consists of one optional argument called a `prompt`. A prompt is a message that is printed on the screen asking the user to enter some text. When the user enters this value and presses the `return` key, the text entered is returned by the function as a string. For this reason, it is common practise to store the result returned by `input` in a variable.To show it in action, enter and execute the following code:   

~~~
first_name=input("Enter your first name: ")
last_name=input("Enter your last name: ")
print("Your full name is" + first_name + " " + last_name)
~~~
{: .python}  
~~~
Enter your first name: Terry
Enter your last name: Crews
Your full name is Terry Crews
~~~
{: .output} 

The input function requires one parameter which is the message that is displayed on the console asking the user to enter input. It returns the text entered by the user as a string and we can accordingly store it in a variable as we see in the code above. Now try the following code:

~~~
number=input("Enter a number: ")
print(number*6))
~~~
{: .python} 
~~~
111111
~~~
{: .output}  
    
Strange huh. Let's check the data type of number:  
  
~~~
print(type(number))
~~~
{: .python} 
~~~
<class 'str'>
~~~
{: .output} 




## Use the Jupyter Notebook for editing and running Python.

*   The [Anaconda package manager][anaconda] is an automated way to install the Jupyter notebook.
    *   See [the setup instructions]({{ site.github.url }}/setup/) for Anaconda installation 
        instructions.
*   It also installs all the extra libraries it needs to run.
*   Once you have installed Python and the Jupyter Notebook requirements, open a shell and type:

    ~~~
    $ jupyter notebook
    ~~~
    {: .source}

*   This will start a Jupyter Notebook server and open your default web browser. 
*   The server runs locally on your machine only and does not use an internet connection.
*   The server sends messages to your browser.
*   The server does the work and the web browser renders the notebook.
*   You can type code into the browser and see the result when the web page talks to the server.
*   This has several advantages:
	- You can easily type, edit, and copy and paste blocks of code.
	- Tab complete allows you to easily access the names of things you are 
    using and learn more about them.
	- It allows you to annotate your code with links, different sized text, bullets, 
    etc to make it more accessible to you and your collaborators.
	- It allows you to display figures next to the code that produces them to 
    tell a complete story of the analysis.
*   The notebook is stored as JSON but can be saved as a .py file if you would
    like to run it from the bash shell or a python interpreter.
*   Just like a webpage, the saved notebook looks different to what you see when 
    it gets rendered by your browser.

FIXME: diagram

> ## How It's Stored
>
> *   The notebook file is stored in a format called JSON.
> *   Just like a webpage, what's saved looks different from what you see in your browser.
> *   But this format allows Jupyter to mix software (in several languages) with documentation 
      and graphics, all in one file.
{: .callout}

## The Notebook has Control and Edit modes.

*   Open a new notebook from the dropdown menu in the top right corner of the file browser page.
*   Each notebook contains one or more cells of various types.

> ## Code vs. Text
>
> We often use the term "code" to mean "the source code of 
> software written in a language such as Python". 
> A "code cell" in a Notebook is a cell that contains software;
> a "text cell" is one that contains ordinary prose written for human beings.
{: .callout}

*   If you press "esc" and "return" alternately,
    the outer border of your code cell will change from gray to green.
    *   The difference in color is subtle.
*   These are the control (gray) and edit (green) modes of your notebook.
*   If you use the "esc" and "return" keys to make the surround gray
    and then press the "H" key,
    a list of all the shortcut keys will appear.
*   When in control mode (esc/gray),
    *   The "B" key will make a new cell below the currently selected cell.
    *   The "A" key will make one above.
    *   The "X" key will delete the current cell.
*   There are lots of shortcuts you can try out and most actions can be 
    done with the menus at the top of the page if you forget the shortcuts.
*   If you remember the "esc" and "H" shortcut, you will be able to find out all the rest.

## Use the keyboard and mouse to select and edit cells.

*   Pressing the "return" key turns the surround green to 
    signify edit mode and you can type into the cell.
*   Because we want to be able to write many lines of code in a single cell,
    pressing the "return" key when the border is green moves the cursor to the next line in the cell
    just like in a text editor.
*   We need some other way to tell the Notebook we want to run what's in the cell.
*   Pressing the "return" key and the "shift" key together will execute the contents of the cell.
*   Notice that the "return" and "shift" keys on the 
    right of the keyboard are right next to each other.

## The Notebook will turn Markdown into pretty-printed documentation.

*   Notebooks can also render [Markdown][markdown].
    *   A simple plain-text format for writing lists, links, 
        and other things that might go into a web page.
    *   Equivalently, a subset of HTML that looks like what you'd send in an old-fashioned email.
*   Turn the current cell into a Markdown cell by entering 
    the control mode (esc/gray) and press the "M" key.
*   `In [ ]:` will disappear to show it is no longer a code cell
    and you will be able to write in Markdown.
*   Turn the current cell into a Code cell
    by entering the control mode (esc/gray) and press the "Y" key.

## Markdown does most of what HTML does.

<div class="row">
  <div class="col-md-6" markdown="1">
~~~
*   Use asterisks
*   to create
*   bullet lists.
~~~
{: .source}
  </div>
  <div class="col-md-6" markdown="1">
*   Use asterisks
*   to create
*   bullet lists.
  </div>
</div>

<div class="row">
  <div class="col-md-6" markdown="1">
~~~
1.  Use numbers
1.  to create
1.  numbered lists.
~~~
{: .source}
  </div>
  <div class="col-md-6" markdown="1">
1.  Use numbers
1.  to create
1.  numbered lists.
  </div>
</div>

<div class="row">
  <div class="col-md-6" markdown="1">
~~~
# A Level-1 Heading
~~~
{: .source}
  </div>
  <div class="col-md-6" markdown="1">
# A Level-1 Heading
  </div>
</div>

<div class="row">
  <div class="col-md-6" markdown="1">
~~~
## A Level-2 Heading (etc.)
~~~
{: .source}
  </div>
  <div class="col-md-6" markdown="1">
## A Level-2 Heading (etc.)
  </div>
</div>

<div class="row">
  <div class="col-md-6" markdown="1">
~~~
Line breaks
don't matter.

But blank lines
create new paragraphs.
~~~
{: .source}
  </div>
  <div class="col-md-6" markdown="1">
Line breaks
don't matter.

But blank lines
create new paragraphs.
  </div>
</div>

<div class="row">
  <div class="col-md-6" markdown="1">
~~~
[Create links](http://software-carpentry.org) with `[...](...)`.
Or use [named links][data_carpentry].

[links]: http://datacarpentry.org
~~~
{: .source}
  </div>
  <div class="col-md-6" markdown="1">
[Create links](http://software-carpentry.org) with `[...](...)`.
Or use [named links][data_carpentry].

[data_carpentry]: http://datacarpentry.org
  </div>
</div>

> ## Creating Lists in Markdown
>
> Create a nested list in a Markdown cell in a notebook that looks like this:
>
> 1.  Get funding.
> 2.  Do work.
>     *   Design experiment.
>     *   Collect data.
>     *   Analyze.
> 3.  Write up.
> 4.  Publish.
{: .challenge}

> ## More Math
>
> What is displayed when a Python cell in a notebook
> that contains several calculations is executed?
> For example, what happens when this cell is executed?
>
> ~~~
> 7 * 3
> 2 + 1
> ~~~
> {: .source}
{: .challenge}

> ## Change an Existing Cell from Code to Markdown
>
> What happens if you write some Python in a code cell
> and then you switch it to a Markdown cell?
> For example,
> put the following in a code cell:
>
> ~~~
> x = 6 * 7 + 12
> print(x)
> ~~~
> {: .python}
>
> And then run it with shift+return to be sure that it works as a code cell.
> Now go back to the cell and use escape+M to switch the cell to Markdown
> and "run" it with shift+return.
> What happened and how might this be useful?
{: .challenge}

> ## Mathematics
>
> Standard Markdown (such as we're using for these notes) won't render equations,
> but the Notebook will.
> Create a new Markdown cell
> and enter the following:
>
> ~~~
> $\Sigma_{i=1}^{N} 2^{-i} \approx 1$
> ~~~
> {: .source}
>
> (It's probably easier to copy and paste.)
> What does it display?
> What do you think the underscore `_`, circumflex `^`, and dollar sign `$` do?
{: .challenge}

[anaconda]: https://docs.continuum.io/anaconda/install
[markdown]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown
